In the previous lecture I've mentioned that there is a great tool for Lara Vela called larval debug
bar which will show you a lot of information about what happens inside your application with queries
were executed.
So it is a great tool that you probably should use when you develop your application.
So this is the link to this page.
This package is included.
So let's go ahead and install this package inside your application so we can just copy this command
to installed a lot of old debug bar paste it into the terminal and it will be installed so we don't
really have to watch that installation process but the important thing to know is that it will be automatically
enabled when up debug is set to true by the way you can set it inside your dealt end of file.
Well it should be enabled by default because we are in the development mode.
So if you haven't changed it then it should be by default.
True.
Now it took awhile to actually download this package and install it inside larval but after it has finished
you should be ready to go.
So basically it is enabled by default.
So now when you will refresh the page what you immediately see is you see all the views that were used
and you also see all the queries that were executed for your application.
So what we can immediately see is that we have hundred for queries executed for this single page and
what it does is it only displays a list of blog posts and then on the right it shows that most comment
at blog posts most active users and most active users last month.
So a hundred for queries seems to be too much.
And probably this also happens because we are fetching the names of the hours of those blog posts so
we can actually optimize it without using the cache at all.
But anyway we have something to work on now what we can immediately do without even thinking about what
is the topic of this section which is caching is we can eliminate some of these queries.
So you see that we are having a lot of select queries for the user and well it's basically most of the
queries and we are actually reading their user name which created a particular blog post.
So what we can do here is from this particular query we actually should have used with to fetch the
user relation of the blog post along with the blog posts themselves.
So this would immediately optimize our application and quite a lot.
So now let's refresh the page and by doing this simple change you can see what happens.
We have five queries so it's already pretty big optimization.
But without knowing what happens we probably wouldn't be able to figure it out.
So that's the well immediate benefit of using tools like larval debug bar.
Now let's go back to the caching and we'll continue in the next lecture.
Now let's take a look at what we actually can find inside this level debug bar.
So first we have a message a stop.
There is nothing in there but there is the timeline so you can see how much time did it take to boot
your application.
So basically that means how much time lot of has took to start up and then you can see how much time
it took for your application.
Actual code to execute.
So this could be starting up of the lot of when the request started.
And then how much time your application actually took.
So starting from controllers fetching data and rendering a view so you can see it is a hundred twenty
two milliseconds you can see what the exceptions were from.
We haven't any next you can see what views were used and where on the rooftop you can see all the information
about this particular route.
So what HDP mattered what your URL was used what media were well supplied.
What's the root name.
What is the controller.
The namespace and all the other information like the file where this action was actually executed.
Then we have our query stop.
So this is really interesting because we can see what is the actual rescue our query that Lara Val is
generating from our eloquent model.
You can also check some additional information like the stack trace which basically means what's the
order in which certain classes were called to execute this code.
Now here you can see all the queries.
And also interesting things on the right side is how long did it that it took to execute the square
and get back the information from the database server.
And also when this query was started and what database it has run on.
So those are pretty fast so you can see they only took microseconds but the slowest one is to fetch
all the blog post which took three milliseconds.
Now this would show you the emails that were sent.
We haven't talked about e-mails yet.
So it's nothing of our concern.
Then we have that out top where you can check what's the user name so we can see we are the guests.
So we weren't authenticated.
Now interesting thing is also the gate top where you can see what gate checks were tried and what is
the result of them.
So what we can see is that we have two hundred gate checks.
So it is because actually currently inside the database we have hundreds of blog posts.
At least I have you might have different values.
So it's also applied to the initial queries that also depend on how many data you had inside the database
how many blog posts.
Now here we see that for each of those blog posts listed here we tried to see if they can edit or delete
the blog posts.
So this actually happens inside the view in the posts index blade BHP.
So this is here at the top when we try to verify whether the user can perform specific operations.
So we are using this can and we can also optimize that.
So this shouldn't be executed if the user is not authenticated at all which we aren't currently as you
can see on the top of the application.
So we'll do that in a second but then we also have some information about the session.
So what is stored in what data is stored in the current user session.
And also finally on the request that you have some information about this age GDP request.
So what's the path.
What was the result resulting status code the content type and header server variables cookies and all
the other attributes.
And of course additionally here you can see that authenticated user the route how much memory we used
for this request.
How long did it took.
And also the version of the peach bee that your server is running.
So now let's do another optimization.
So here we are unnecessarily checking for some privileges even though the user is not authenticated
at all.
So we already should know that.
Well he doesn't have any privileges so he can't have any abilities.
Now you might remember that we already did that inside our layout so we used those larval directive
called guest so we verified if the user is not authenticated.
And only if he is we used else to display something for the authenticated user.
Now I've mentioned that there is another directive like this and it is called out.
So what we can do here is we can surround this with off and end of directives.
So this would only ever be considered to be rendered if the user is authenticated and we can do the
same here.
So it doesn't make sense to verify permissions if the user is not authenticated at all.
So let's say the changes and now refresh the page and see if that did change anything.
So now you can see that there is nothing under the gate.
So now we just haven't checked for any permissions and obviously didn't make any sense anyway because
obviously a user was not authenticated.
So those were first optimizations that we can immediately do by installing this lot of all debug bar
and in the next lecture we'll see how and which queries we might optimize or which data we should be
storing inside the cache.